# Conscious
- Why would any collection of matter in the universe be conscious?
- Unlike the “easy problems” of explaining animal behavior or understanding which processes in the brain give rise to which functions, the hard problem lies in understanding why some of these physical processes have an experience associated with them at
- research suggests that our “gut feelings” are more reliable in many situations than the fruits of conscious reasoning.
- An intuition is simply the powerful sense that something is true without our having an awareness or an understanding of the reasons behind this feeling—it may or may not represent something true about the world.
- it’s possible for conscious experience to exist without any outward expression at all (at least in a brain).
- but we can imagine other, less disturbing instances in which a conscious mind might lack a mode of expression—scenarios involving artificial intelligence (AI), for example, in which an advanced system becomes conscious but has no way of convincingly communicating this to us. But one thing is certain: it’s possible for a vivid experience of consciousness to exist undetected from the outside.
- some behaviors of people and plants are so alike that this in fact poses a challenge to our using certain behavior as evidence of conscious experience.
- complex behavior doesn’t necessarily shed light on whether a system
- complex behavior doesn’t necessarily shed light on whether a system is conscious or not.
- The problem is that both conscious and nonconscious states seem to be compatible with any behavior, even those associated with emotion, so a behavior itself doesn’t necessarily signal the presence of consciousness.
- I can’t seem to shake the false intuition that I could even choose to leave my body (if I could only figure out how) and everything constituting “me” would somehow remain magically intact.
- The concept of a conscious will that is free seems to be incoherent—it suggests that one’s will is separate and isolated from the rest of its environment, yet paradoxically able to influence its environment by making choices within it. I was once at an event where my friend and meditation teacher Joseph Goldstein was asked if he believed we have free will. He answered the question with arresting clarity when he said that he couldn’t even figure out what the term could possibly mean. What does it mean to have a will that is free from the cause-and-effect relationships of the universe? As he gestured with his hands dancing above him in the air, trying to point to this imaginary free will, he asked, “How can we even try to picture such a will floating about?” Many people, however, object on ethical grounds to the assertion that conscious will is an illusion, holding that people should be held responsible for their choices and behavior. But people can (and should) be held responsible for their actions, for a variety of reasons; the two beliefs are not necessarily contradictory. We can still acknowledge the difference between premeditated, lucid actions and the sort that are caused by mental illness or other disorders of the mind/brain.6 Imagine we’re in a future city, and a self-driving car hits a pedestrian. The response to this unfortunate event would depend on why the car didn’t stop. If it turns out its software is flawed and can’t detect pedestrians when they are bundled up in dark winter coats, for instance, that would require one response. If the car’s sensors malfunctioned due to a defect specific to that one particular car, that would require a different response. And if the car hit the pedestrian because it was
- The concept of a conscious will that is free seems to be incoherent—it suggests that one’s will is separate and isolated from the rest of its environment, yet paradoxically able to influence its environment
- The concept of a conscious will that is free seems to be incoherent—it suggests that one’s will is separate and isolated from the rest of its environment, yet paradoxically able to influence its environment by making choices within it. I was once at an event where my friend and meditation teacher Joseph Goldstein was asked if he believed we have free will. He answered the question with arresting clarity when he said that he couldn’t even figure out what the term could possibly mean. What does it mean to have a will that is free from the cause-and-effect relationships of the universe? As he gestured with his hands dancing above him in the air, trying to point to this imaginary free will, he asked, “How can we even try to picture such a will floating about?” Many people, however, object on ethical grounds to the assertion that conscious will is an illusion, holding that people should be held responsible for their choices and behavior. But people can (and should) be held responsible for their actions, for a variety of reasons; the two beliefs are not necessarily contradictory. We can still acknowledge the difference between premeditated, lucid actions and the sort that are caused by mental illness or other disorders of the mind/brain.6 Imagine we’re in a future city, and a self-driving car hits a pedestrian. The response to this unfortunate event would depend on why the car didn’t stop. If it turns out its software is flawed and can’t detect pedestrians when they are bundled up in dark winter coats, for instance, that would require one response. If the car’s sensors malfunctioned due to a defect specific to that one particular car, that would require a different response. And if the car hit the pedestrian because it was
- The concept of a conscious will that is free seems to be incoherent—it suggests that one’s will is separate and isolated from the rest of its environment, yet paradoxically able to influence its environment by making choices within it.
- We can still acknowledge the difference between premeditated, lucid actions and the sort that are caused by mental illness or other disorders of the mind/brain.
- we actually become conscious of physical events in the world slightly after they have occurred
- We now have reason to believe that with access to certain activity inside your brain, another person can know what you’re going to do before you do.
- It seems that, under the right conditions, it’s possible to convince people that they have consciously initiated an action that was actually controlled by someone else.
- It is no contradiction to say that consciousness is essential to ethical concerns, yet irrelevant when it comes to will.
- It seems clear that we can’t decide what to think or feel, any more than we can decide what to see or hear. A highly complicated convergence of factors and past events—including our genes, our personal life history, our immediate environment, and the state of our brain—is responsible for each next thought.
- With so many behind-the-scenes forces at work—from the essential neurological processes we previously examined to bacterial infections and parasites—it’s hard to see how our behavior, preferences, and even choices could be under the control of our conscious will in any real sense. It seems much more accurate to say that consciousness is along for the ride—watching the show, rather than creating or controlling it.
- “our sense of individuality and separateness hinges on a bounded self and a clear demarcation between subject and object.
- Even when only the slightest glow of awareness remains, consciousness is obviously present in some form, up until the last moment it exists. And this minimal level of awareness—whatever it’s like right before the lights go out altogether—may be completely unlike our familiar, human experience.
- that the human brain, under the right conditions, can seamlessly integrate foreign objects into its map of what constitutes its body.
- Some philosophers go so far as to suggest that there isn’t a hard problem of consciousness at all, reducing consciousness to an illusion. But as others have pointed out, consciousness is the one thing that can’t be an illusion
- why rule out the possibility that many forms of consciousness exist simultaneously within the boundaries of my body?
- how could it be that when they form a more complex physical object or system, those smaller points of consciousness combine to create a new, more complex sphere of consciousness?
- If the most basic constituents of matter have some level of conscious experience, how could it be that when they form a more complex physical object or system, those smaller points of consciousness combine to create a new, more complex sphere of consciousness?
- our awareness is experienced across time and cannot be separated from it.
- photons exist in many possible states at once until interacting with something, but the something needn’t be a conscious something. (This would change, of course, if we were to discover that consciousness is
- photons exist in many possible states at once until interacting with something, but the something needn’t be a conscious something. (This would change, of course, if we were to discover that consciousness is fundamental to matter, as consciousness would then be associated with all measurement, by definition.)
