# Kissinger A Biography
- Kissinger’s desire for social and political acceptance—and his yearning to be liked—was unusually ardent, so much so that it led him to compromise his beliefs at times.
- Still another legacy of his childhood was his philosophical pessimism. His worldview was dark, suffused with a sense of tragedy. He once wrote that Americans, who have “never suffered disaster, find it difficult to comprehend a policy conducted with a premonition of catastrophe.”
- Given a choice of order or justice, he often said, paraphrasing Goethe, he would choose order. He had seen too clearly the consequences of disorder.
- The Nazi regime was in no way disorderly though.
- Kissinger, he explained, seemed to have an inner ear for the music of history.
- A breakdown in social order, he felt, provided a dangerous opening for totalitarian regimes of either the left or the right.
- ?
- Having once made up one’s mind to survive, it was a necessity to follow through with a singleness of purpose, inconceivable to you sheltered people in the States. Such singleness of purpose broached no stopping in front of accepted sets of values, it had to disregard ordinary standards of morality. One could only survive through lies, tricks and by somehow acquiring food to fill one’s belly. The weak, the old had no chance.
- Survival, he noted, sometimes required a disregard for moral standards that was “inconceivable” to those who had led “sheltered” lives.
- Kissinger strongly opposed the creation of Israel. “He said it would alienate the Arabs and jeopardize U.S. interests
- “In the life of every person there comes a point when he realizes that out of all the seemingly limitless possibilities of his youth he has in fact become one actuality,” he began. “No longer is life a broad plain with forests and mountains beckoning all-around, but it becomes apparent that one’s journey across the meadows has indeed followed a regular path, that one can no longer go this way or that.”
- “The disputes are so bitter because the stakes are so small.”
- Hiroshima had not created a new world; it merely showed that man had yet to learn history’s lessons about shaping a stable balance of power.
- Stability is the prime goal of diplomacy. It is served when nations accept the legitimacy of the existing world order and when they act based on their national interests; it is threatened when nations embark on ideological or moral crusades.
- Kissinger’s conservative realpolitik, as reflected in his dissertation, was based on the principle, taught by realists from Karl von Clausewitz to Hans Morgenthau, that diplomacy cannot be divorced from the realities of force and power.
- “Whenever peace—conceived as the avoidance of war—has been the primary objective of a power or a group of powers, the international system has been at the mercy of the most ruthless member of the international community,” he wrote. A more proper goal, he argued, was for “stability based on an equilibrium of forces.”
- Stability/equilibrium in peace and conflict?
- “German refugees had firsthand experience of the effect that ideas can have on the world, of the notion that ‘isms’ can have real consequences.
- Kissinger argued that the Treaty of Versailles, ending World War I, was to blame. The participants at that peace conference did not understand the importance of symbols to a culture, he said. They rid Germany of its princes and grand dukes and other national symbols, leaving an emotional vacuum.
- Kissinger, who was still only thirty-two, began by making a presentation on conceptual thinking; it was important, he said, to see the grand sweep of an idea rather than bogging down in details.
- Gelb would thenceforth consider Kissinger to be “the typical product of an authoritarian background—devious with his peers, domineering with his subordinates, obsequious to his superiors.”10
- Gelb would thenceforth consider Kissinger to be “the typical product of an authoritarian background—devious with his peers, domineering with his subordinates, obsequious to his superiors.”10
- Thus, the U.S. needed to be able to threaten a limited response when faced with a limited challenge, such as a Soviet threat to Berlin. “A country not willing to risk limited war because it fears that resistance to aggression on any scale may lead to all-out war,” he argued, “will have no choice in a showdown but to surrender.”
- Kissinger would later argue that it was wrong to draw too many comparisons between himself and Bismarck, that he was a student of the Iron Chancellor and not a devotee.
- “Bismarck urged that foreign policy had to be based not on sentiment but on an assessment of strength,” Kissinger wrote. That would also become one of Kissinger’s guiding principles.
- One lesson he learned was that a president does not need a lot of people who tell him what he cannot do; it is better to be one of those telling him what he can do, or at least offering preferable alternatives.15
- One of its central tenets was that a nation’s influence depends on the perception the world holds of its power and of its willingness to use power.
- “No one could really explain to me how even on the most favorable assumptions . . . the war was going to end.”
- Sometimes these word games paid off. But usually they opened Kissinger up to accusations that he had left important disagreements unresolved by talking out of both sides of his mouth.
- “One factor that had most convinced me of Kissinger’s credibility was the length to which he went to protect his secrecy,” Nixon later wrote, showing his appreciation for the finer points of duplicity.
- “To co-operate without losing one’s soul, to assist without sacrificing one’s identity,” he wrote of Metternich’s collaboration with Napoleon, “what harder test of moral toughness exists?”
- Nixon’s willingness to say the opposite of what he believed was an early sign of his penchant for conspiratorial and covert ways of conducting policy. Kissinger’s willingness to go along was, in turn, an early sign of precisely that: his willingness to go along. When he got to the podium, he claimed that what Nixon had said reflected his own thinking.
- To fathom foreign policy, Kissinger has said, a person must be constantly thinking of all the connections involved, even while shaving in the morning.
- that the worst punishment can be having one’s wishes filled too completely.”
- “Most men mature around a central core; Nixon had several. This is why he was never at peace with himself.”
- The problems were mainly due to an intellectual constipation caused by a system that encouraged caution rather than creativity. There was no reward for challenging prevailing orthodoxies. Clear thinking, even simple declarative sentences, were considered dangerous.
- Both Ellsberg and Ikle later said that it would have seemed paradoxical to conceive of a policy based on trying to beat Hanoi into submission through unrestricted bombings and the invasion of Cambodia, on the one hand, while at the same time embarking on a policy of substantial unilateral troop withdrawals.
- Linkage was a policy that played to Kissinger’s intellectual strengths: it appealed to a person who could conjure up the connections and motivations that linked far-flung events. That type of thinking came naturally
- Linkage was a policy that played to Kissinger’s intellectual strengths: it appealed to a person who could conjure up the connections and motivations that linked far-flung events. That type of thinking came naturally to someone who was both a brilliant conceptualizer and slightly conspiratorial in outlook, who
- Linkage was a policy that played to Kissinger’s intellectual strengths: it appealed to a person who could conjure up the connections and motivations that linked far-flung events. That type of thinking came naturally to someone who was both a brilliant conceptualizer and slightly conspiratorial in outlook, who could feel the connections the way a spider senses twitches in its web.
- A naturally serious man, he had learned that a talent for tactical self-deprecation was useful in defusing jealousy and softening his self-important demeanor.
- The underlying assumption here is that decisions made without public scrutiny are better than those made after an open discussion.
- “If you quit, Henry,” said Safire, “you’ll never get a phone call from a beautiful woman again. The secret of your attraction is your proximity to power.”
- For Kissinger, Vietnamization violated his cardinal rule of realism: military force and diplomacy must work together. In
- For Kissinger, Vietnamization violated his cardinal rule of realism: military force and diplomacy must work together.
- Like most of America’s great foreign policy doctrines, the Nixon Doctrine was partly a response to a packaging problem. Nixon did not want the American withdrawals from Vietnam to seem like merely a helpless reaction to a sorry situation. Instead, he wanted to take the idea of Vietnamization and wrap it in the guise of a coherent, purposeful philosophy.
- American policy, the report said, should be “based on a realistic assessment of our and others’ interests,” rather than on emotional or moral ideals. “The source of America’s historic greatness has been our ability to see what had to be done, and then do it.”
- “I fell into the trap of many negotiators of becoming an advocate of my own negotiation.”
- Intellectually secure, he liked having his ideas challenged; socially insecure, he sought to win the approval of all those around him.
- What a complicated man!
- statesmen must be judged not only by their intentions, but by the outcomes of their policies. By invading Cambodia, the U.S. joined with North Vietnam in spreading the war to engulf a beautiful nation that had struggled to remain peaceful.
- “This will have long-term consequences because tomorrow’s foreign policy is based on today’s domestic situation.”
- Kissinger’s willingness to appear sympathetic to critics of all persuasions, along with his desire to charm and please, made it hard to tell whether, deep inside, he was really more of a dove who was struggling to rein in Nixon’s mad instincts or a hawk who truly believed that a bugout would destroy America’s credibility.
- the fear of leaks can be more dangerous than the leaks themselves.
- Consequently, the appearance of power is a large component of the reality of power.
- “Vanity can never be completely dissociated in high office from the perception of the national interest,”
- And fudging distinctions was one of Kissinger’s greatest talents as a bargainer.
- And fudging distinctions was one of Kissinger’s greatest talents as a bargainer.
- Peace came in the guise of the droning voice of an elderly revolutionary wrapping the end of a decade of bloodshed into legalistic ambiguity.”
- Ever since the Strategic Bombing Survey after World War II, those who believe that bombing industrial areas can weaken enemy resolve have repeatedly had to learn that this is not as easy as it may seem in front of a map in the Situation Room.
- “Woe to the statesman whose reasons for entering a war do not appear so plausible at its end as at its beginning.”
- “The statesman is suspicious of those who personalize foreign policy, for history teaches him the fragility of structures dependent upon individuals
- The role of such personal factors in foreign affairs—as opposed to colder calculations of national interests—is ignored by many historians, including by Kissinger during his academic years. Yet the pressures and inducements that are created by personal bonds of trust can become part of the atmosphere in a high-pressure negotiating frenzy such as a shuttle mission.
- The line between diplomacy and duplicity, like that between charm and hypocrisy, is a fine one.
- In discussing deviousness in foreign policy, Kissinger once wrote that “I tended to share Metternich’s view that in a negotiation the perfectly straightforward person was the most difficult to deal with.”
- Britain, which had been the colonial power there, had withdrawn from “east of Suez” and declared itself unable to remain the defender of Western interests in the Persian Gulf area. Kissinger and Nixon decided that Iran would help the U.S. assume that role in accordance with the Nixon Doctrine, the strategy announced on Guam in 1969 that sought to rely on lavishly armed local allies to help defend America’s regional interests.
- The Pentagon had been warning that Iran was getting too many sophisticated weapons for its military to absorb. But it was overruled for what were clearly political reasons.
- The Iranians spent more than $16 billion for U.S. arms from 1972 to 1977, increasing their military budget sevenfold. By the end, military purchases accounted for 40 percent of the nation’s bloated budget.
- “While he almost certainly lied, the untruths are matters of little consequence when weighed against his service to the state,”
- “Henry is a genius,” he said, “but you don’t have to accept everything he recommends. He can be invaluable, and he’ll be very loyal, but you can’t let him have a totally free hand.”
- Americans had traditionally viewed the world in a Manichaean way: nations are at peace or at war, they are either good or evil, friend or foe. This led to a historic oscillation between isolationism and overcommitment
- There is no denying that a nation’s credibility in keeping commitments and resisting adversaries has an effect on the global balance, as Kissinger argued.
- When Henry Kissinger was asked, at a secret congressional hearing in 1975, why the U.S. had abruptly cut off aid to Kurdish rebels fighting for their freedom from Iraq, he replied that “covert action should not be confused with missionary work.” The answer, though glib, reflected a basic tenet of his philosophy. Moral crusaders, he felt, made dangerous statesmen. In a nation whose instincts tend to be idealistic, even at times crusading, Kissinger was a rare and unabashed disciple of the school of political thought known as “realism.”
- This idealistic streak in the American character, this desire to seek moral perfection rather than messy accommodations, was what caused the nation to lurch over the years between isolationism and interventionism, to embark on crusades (World War I, Vietnam), and then to recoil into self-righteous withdrawal.
- The heartland program illustrated an interesting dichotomy in Kissinger’s style: no American statesman has ever been more secretive and conspiratorial in managing foreign policy tactics, yet (especially after he became secretary of state) none tried harder to explain to the press and the public the conceptual goals he pursued.
- “The art of statesmanship is to foresee the inevitable and to expedite its occurrence.”
- With an eagerness that struck his more moderate friends as unseemly, even craven, he courted the conservatives with all eight cylinders of charm. It was a difficult task.
- With an eagerness that struck his more moderate friends as unseemly, even craven, he courted the conservatives with all eight cylinders of charm.
- Commercial acumen, however, was not a prominent component of Kissinger’s genius, and the business of deal-making, already in decline when he became involved, did not become a major part of his work.
- I am sure finances played no part, the congressman said; Dr. Kissinger has always defended oppressive dictatorships whether or not he had a financial stake in them.
- He explained how sensitive the Chinese were about outsiders who attempted to meddle in their domestic affairs. The Chinese had broken with the Soviets over the same sort of issue thirty years earlier.
- Napoleon once said of Metternich that he confused policy with intrigue. Kissinger was a master at both, and as with Metternich, his policies reflected the complexities of his personality.
- Napoleon once said of Metternich that he confused policy with intrigue. Kissinger was a master at both, and as with Metternich, his policies reflected the complexities of his personality.
- In probing ideas, he was intellectually honest, surprisingly so to those who considered him otherwise deceitful. He surrounded himself with bright people of different philosophic hues, challenged them relentlessly, and was in turn willing to be challenged by them.
- In fact, Kissinger was both a strategist and a tactician. One of the strengths of his mind was its ability to engage on disparate levels, from the grand to the petty.
- Kissinger’s European-style philosophy of international affairs—a power-oriented realism or realpolitik—was rooted in his background. Because he was a product of the Weimar Republic and a victim of the Nazis’ ideological fervor, a yearning for stability and order was bred into his character. He grew up in an environment where trust was not readily instilled and where virtue was not its own reward, so he came naturally to the pessimistic view of human nature that underlies realpolitik
- Power rather than righteousness, he came to believe, determined the world order.
- Power rather than righteousness, he came to believe, determined the world order. Nations that acted based on national interests were less dangerous than those that crusaded on the basis of ideology or their own perception of moral justice.
- Diplomacy based on moral idealism or international law is easy to wage openly; but a realist approach involving ambiguous compromises and power ploys lends itself to covert acts and deception, since it is likely to arouse popular disapproval
- In addition, Kissinger and Nixon turned the world’s bipolar tug-of-war into a three-dimensional chess game that provided the U.S. with more opportunities for creative diplomacy. The new relationship with China, which previous presidents had barely contemplated, gave both of the world’s communist giants an incentive to maintain better relations with the U.S. than they had with one another.
- In addition, Kissinger and Nixon turned the world’s bipolar tug-of-war into a three-dimensional chess game that provided the U.S. with more opportunities for creative diplomacy. The new relationship with China, which previous presidents had barely contemplated, gave both of the world’s communist giants an incentive to maintain better relations with the U.S. than they had with one another.
- The main lines of this policy were followed for the next two decades: a blend of containment and cooperation with Moscow that allowed the internal contradictions of the Soviet system to play out; a step-by-step process in the Middle East that kept the U.S. the dominant player in the region; and a realistic attitude toward China that created a global balance that was more stable and gave Washington more leverage.
- To Kissinger, an emphasis on realism and national interests—even though it might seem callous in its execution—was not a rejection of moral values. Rather, he saw it as the best way to pursue the stable world order that he believed was the ultimate moral imperative, especially in a nuclear age.
- Those with true responsibility for peace, unlike those on the sidelines, cannot afford pure idealism.
- Those with true responsibility for peace, unlike those on the sidelines, cannot afford pure idealism. They must have the courage to deal with ambiguities and accommodations, to realize that great goals can be achieved only in imperfect steps. No side has a monopoly on morality.
