# The Devil That Danced on the Water A Daughters Quest
- In a society built, layer upon infinite layer, on the rock of the extended family, Santigi can produce neither mother nor father, aunt nor uncle, sibling nor cousin. All he knows about himself is that he was born in a village called Gbendembu, near Makeni in the Northern Province.
- Yet what use against the deceit of a state are the memories of a child?
- So very different from the African household in which I was raised. On the weekends and even the weekdays my aunts and uncles appeared at all hours and sat on the veranda for lengthy periods, just keeping company. They talked for just as long as someone had something to say and then lapsed into companionable silence.
- Mohamed and Maureen were together for two years before her father passed them on the other side of Union Street one afternoon. When she arrived home she found him maroon with rage. He told his daughter that he would not tolerate her seeing or being seen with a black man.
- And if you take her from her own country, to a place where she is a stranger, you will have to be utterly loyal to her, too.
- Marriage to my father turned my mother into a multi-hued chameleon. He, by contrast, had been a black man in Scotland and was a black man in Africa.
- In Britain measles is an ordinary childhood illness; in Africa the same virus kills as recklessly and easily as a child tumbling a tower of wooden blocks.
- market. The world of the dealers was a closed one, a tightly run business controlled by a few men who maintained a private code of honour designed to hold on to their monopoly and increase the sum of their wealth.
- The world of the dealers was a closed one, a tightly run business controlled by a few men who maintained a private code of honour designed to hold on to their monopoly and increase the sum of their wealth.
- He and my mother rubbed along, watching each other through the veils of age, race, gender, language and culture. They seemed fond of each other in the way visitors like the locals in a new place, where everyone welcomes them and people are reduced to cartoons of themselves without nuance, detail or subtlety: a superficial world
- He and my mother rubbed along, watching each other through the veils of age, race, gender, language and culture. They seemed fond of each other in the way visitors like the locals in a new place, where everyone welcomes them and people are reduced to cartoons of themselves without nuance, detail or subtlety: a superficial world where everyone laughs and exchanges are full of feigned bonhomie.
- For me people existed only when I could see them. When they left, as far as I was concerned their flesh turned into air and they ceased to be.
- His autonomy and unswerving confidence was matched only by my mother's detachment; but whether with hindsight this was symptomatic of the deterioration of their marriage or the very source of their growing distance from each other, I have never known.
- Under our first dictatorship paranoia flourished and the nerves of the nation were stretched taut as a dancer's hamstring. All that bound the men ruling our country together was a fondness for power and an eye for an opportunity.
- My grandmother liked to call me ‘her little savage’, but I didn't want to be like the little inky man in my book. I refused to eat brown bread. I would not eat my boiled egg if the shell was brown. I wanted nothing but white meat, carved from the breast of the chicken. ‘Brown bread makes you brown and white bread makes you white,’ I recited my own mantra. Did I come up with it myself?
- Prejudice, though, doesn't depend on logic. It distorts images; it is like viewing a pebble through the waters of a stream. And like water it slips through your fingers: there is nothing to grasp hold of, wrestle with. It can always find another opening. It leaks into everything and in the end, if it drains away, it leaves everything damp. Still the same, but slightly stained, with a tide mark around the edges.
- I'd become used to the sort of tales, like ‘Snow White’ or ‘Cinderella’, in which every detail has its place and purpose, driving listener and storyteller to an inevitable, moral conclusion. It didn't occur to me that something of the song might have got lost in the translation.
- ‘It must mean something.’ Although I enjoyed Milik's stories, I'd become used to the sort of tales, like ‘Snow White’ or ‘Cinderella’, in which every detail has its place and purpose, driving listener and storyteller to an inevitable, moral conclusion. It didn't occur to me that something of the song might have got lost in the translation.
- There are things you know, but you don't understand.
- She would travel the world by my stepfather's side, but never come close enough again to smell the rank sweat of humanity or suffer, like a contagion, the fear of the ordinary African who lives and dies at the mercy of his rulers and the elements.
- In Temne the days of the week have no names, the years have no numbers, there are no dates, no decades, centuries or millennia. There are three words to denote the passing of time: today, tomorrow and yesterday. Everything else is viewed in relation to those three positions and extends only a few days in either direction, perhaps because life in rural Africa is so full of hazards that people prefer to live in the here and now rather than speculate on an uncertain future.
- When the British arrived they had ruled the people absolutely and by decree, yet it was they who bestowed a system on all the new nations in which people were supposed to elect their own leaders. No wonder a lot of people were confused.
- I imagined the spirit as she had seen him: a solitary silhouette on the flat lake, turning, pirouetting, as graceful as could be on his one proud foot. He was enjoying himself in that beautiful place, laughing with the sheer pleasure of it all, of that I was certain. I thought that it was probably the woman who had frightened the devil, screaming and running away as she had, rather than the other way around. I wondered if he danced alone at dusk every day.
- It started with the dog walk down the rutted lanes of Tengbe Farkai. I had an image of a world, one gleaned from pre-war readers and my own Janet & John books, full of clean, eternally smiling children and it seemed a better place to be. I was already nostalgic and I had barely begun to live my life yet.
- poor African woman, away from her people, alone in a foreign country. Who was she to tell these people what she ought to be called?
- a poor African woman, away from her people, alone in a foreign country. Who was she to tell these people what she ought to be called?
- There’s a good reason exile was once used as a punishment. It is life apart, life on hold, life in waiting. You may begin full of strength and hope, or just ignorance, but it is time, nothing more than the unending passage of time that wears down your resilience, like the drip of a tap that carves a groove in the granite below. Exile is a war of attrition on the soul, it’s a slow punishment, and it works.
- Exile is a war of attrition.
- And this was what, in the west, they called ‘benign dictatorship’. Good enough for Africa, good enough for Africans.
- It wasn't that she didn't think it was important, I knew, just that his condition couldn't be changed. It was the way people thought: what you couldn't do anything about you learned to accept.
- At some point, not all that long ago, I learned to be careful of people who said they had been great friends with my father: people whose faces I didn't recognise, whose names I had barely ever heard. It took me a while to analyse the suspicion that flared with the sound of those words. In time I put my finger on it. There was a difference between the way those who claimed friendship spoke about my father, and the way his true friends talked about him. Or, to be more precise, it was the fact that his real friends, in conversation with me, spoke of him. The others talked about themselves.
- Ours was a country of immeasurable beauty, at once full of promise yet riven with unknowable perils.
- had been among those who believed that anarchy and evil had no place in the society I knew, where respect for elders was profound, the authority of the family entrenched.
- I had been among those who believed that anarchy and evil had no place in the society I knew, where respect for elders was profound, the authority of the family entrenched.
- I had been among those who believed that anarchy and evil had no place in the society I knew, where respect for elders was profound, the authority of the family entrenched.
- had the knowledge I had desired for so long – and what good did it do?
- had the knowledge I had desired for so long – and what good did it do?
- I had the knowledge I had desired for so long – and what good did it do?
- began wonder all over again whether I was right to come here, seeking salve for old wounds among people whose own suffering was so raw.
- I began wonder all over again whether I was right to come here, seeking salve for old wounds among people whose own suffering was so raw.
- I began wonder all over again whether I was right to come here, seeking salve for old wounds among people whose own suffering was so raw.
